So I'm back in our project and there for example we got the first cases where we could add validation,
the login and the sign up pages. There
we want to validate, for example on the sign up page that the email address is a valid email address with
an @ sign and a domain ending,
that the password for example is at least six characters long,
whatever your requirement is and that the confirm password matches the other password,
that would be helpful too
and later when we create a product where we for example enter a url, we might want to validate that
this is a valid url.
So these are all things that we can add with the help of proper validation and that is exactly what
we'll dive into now.
Now to add validation, we'll use a third party package,
the package we'll be using is called express validator and you can simply google for express validator to find these
official docs which are always worth checking out,
in there you find quick command on how to install it and then you find a link to the full official docs which
is this separate webpage where you learn all about using it
and this is really a good idea to dive in because I will introduce you to this package, if you want to
learn all the ins and outs about it,
definitely check out this documentation.
So let's first of all install it with this command here,
so just using npm as we did it for other packages too.
So back in our project code which is the code I've finished with in the last course module, we can simply
enter this here to install express validator into this project and once this is done, we are ready to
use it.
So let me restart my development server with npm start and now let's find out how we can use express
validator
and let's start with our authentication routes for that.
So here we obviously have our auth controller with the different controller actions and we got our routes
folder with the auth.js file.
Now typically you want to validate on your post or your non-get routes because you want to validate
whenever the user sends data and that is not the case for our get routes for example
but for posting the login data or posting the sign up data, I want to validate that data and I will
start with the sign up, with post sign up, with this route.
Let's say we want to add some validation to that route and we want to ensure that our e-mail here is
an email, the password is at least let's say five characters long and that the confirm password matches
our password,
these would be some nice checks which I want to add here.
Now to add that with that package installed, in my auth.js
file in the routes folder, I can import something from that package,
let's name that exp validator or however you want to name it and require express validator here.
However the import here looks a bit different,
we import a sub-package because express validator is basically made up of a couple of sub-packages
you could say and there we need the check package which is the package you use for
well all the validation logic you could want to add.
We can also use a next gen javascript syntax because exp validator which we import will be a javascript
object and we can use a feature called destructuring where we use curly braces on the left side of the
equal sign
and then you add some property names which you want to pull out of the object that
this would give you. So here and you can find it in the official docs, we'll get a check function actually,
so in the object which we import and which we would have stored in exp validator otherwise, there
will be a check property that holds a function and we can import validation result, though we don't need
it here we'll need it later.
There also are other functions you can import
and again the official docs are a great way to dive in deeper.
What this does is in the end it just gives us a check function which we import from this package here
and now adding validation to a route is really simple. For this post route,
if we want to add validation, we add an extra middleware,
remember you have that path and then you can add as many middlewares request handlers as you want and
I'll add a new one here and I'll add a new one by adding my check function and calling it here
and check this function will in the end return a middleware. So here I then just enter the field name
or an array of fields which I want to check,
now how does this work?
Well I can simply add check
and then the field name.
Now we can have a look at our sign up view to find out that for example there, we'll have an email field,
so it's this name I'm looking for.
We have an e-mail field in there, so email will be the name of that field in the requests we're receiving,
so in our auth route here, I can check email. Now this tell this middleware, the express validator that
I'm interested in confirming that e-mail value or that
I'm interested in validating that value,
we then call a method and this will in the end then return a middleware that is understood by expressjs
.
So we call a method on this object which is returned by this check function that now allows us to do
all kinds of checks,
for example isEmail.
Now there are a bunch of built-in methods and I will show you where to find them in a second
and what this will now do is it will use this package to check the email field on the incoming request and
it looks for that field in the body, in the query parameters, in the headers and in the cookies and it finds
that field and then checks if that is a valid email address and
that is the first step.
Now with that, we have this middleware in place, now we can go to our controller here under controllers
of course and import another part of that package.
So here I will also import with this destructuring syntax because this package just exposes a bunch of
stuff and I only want to get some specific things and I import from express validator check here as
well
and there we now need to import the validation result, validation result will be a function that allows
us to gather all the errors
prior validation middleware like this one might have thrown or might have stored.
So now we just have to go to the post sign up route because that is where I did add my middleware and in
here,
I can now simply extract my errors and store them in a constant, errors by calling validation result
on the request and in that request, this express validator middleware which we added here will have
added errors that can now be retrieved. With this middleware here in the auth.js file on the routes folder, we are
collecting errors so to say or this middleware will store some errors it found in an errors object
so to say and this validation result function will go through that errors object managed by that middleware
on the request and will then collect them all in this errors constant and we can then use that constant
to check if we do have errors.
Now how does that work?
Well we can simply check if errors
and then there is a method we can call, there is the isEmpty method and isEmpty will return true or false
depending on whether we got errors or not
and if this is not empty, that's why I add an exclamation mark to check the inverse, if this is not empty,
then we could return a response where we set the status code to 422 which is a common status code for
indicating that validation failed,
so it's an error status code,
it will still send a response just with this different status code and then we can call
render here and render the page again.
And I don't redirect here because I want to redirect upon success,
if we fail I will render the same page again,
so here I will render the same as I do in get sign up, here
we can copy that render message, that render call here I should say.
We do that same rendering here without res, just render, I render that same page, auth sign up
and I can also add my my errors there, the error message is then not message like this but I can output errors
and then there is an array function which I can call to return an array of errors
I might have and we can also output this here, with console log to get a feeling for what's in there,
errors array like this, let's see what we got in there.
Now if we save all that, with that in place with the middleware and the error collection mechanism,
let me enter something here,
test which is not a valid email and let me hit sign up.
Now I get a message here which is the default browser validation because I set this to type e-mail in
my
sign up view here,
I have type e-mail and this adds this default browser validation.
Now one thing you can do is you can add no validate to the overall form, validate
to disable this check.
Now
by default you want to add it because it is a nice client side validation that can improve the user experience
but here to see how it works without it
and to allow me to make deliberate mistakes, I will disable it for now with no validate added to the form,
not the input but to the form
and then if I reload that page and I do enter something invalid again, I can submit.
Now don't be confused by the error message,
this is to be expected because we don't get a message, we get an array of errors
but if we check our server side console, we see that this console log where I log an array of the errors that was
collected gives me that array
and we get the square brackets, it's an array. An array of objects
and in that object, we find out which parameter was the problematic one,
what value was entered and which message was generated by the validation middleware
and this is a message we can use to output an error message if we want to.